---
sidebar_position: 6
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Mermaid from '@theme/Mermaid';

# Derivations

At times, the collections generated by a [capture](../#captures) may not be suitable for your needs.
For instance, you might want to filter certain documents or add calculations to them.
Perhaps you need to unpack an array nested inside or aggregate data from many documents.
Alternatively, you might need to merge across several collections using a common key,
or employ business logic to arrive at a real-time decision.
With Flow derivations, you can perform a wide range of transformations,
from a simple remapping to complicated, self-referential, and stateful transaction processing.

In essence, a derivation is a [collection](../#collections)
that is constructed from applying transformations to one or more sourced collections.
Derivations operate continuously, keeping up with updates to the source collections as they happen.

A derivation consists of three primary elements:

* A collection that stores the output.
* A [catalog task](../#tasks) that applies transformations to source documents
  as they become available and writes the resulting documents into the derived collection.
* An [internal task state](#internal-state) which enables aggregations, joins, and windowing.

Today, Flow enables you to write derivations using either
[SQLite](#sqlite) or [TypeScript](#typescript).
Additional language support is in the works.

## Tutorial

### Introducing AcmeBank

The following tutorial sections will refer to the following common example
to illustrate concepts.

Suppose you have an application through which users send one another
some amount of currency, like in-game tokens or dollars or digital kittens.
You have a `transfers` collection of user-requested transfers,
each sending funds from one account to another:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="transfers.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/transfers.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="transfers.schema.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/transfers.schema.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

There are many views over this data that you might require,
such as summaries of sender or receiver activity,
or current account balances within your application.

### Filtering Large Transfers

:::note
This section introduces SQLite derivations, SQL lambda blocks and `$parameters`.
:::

Your compliance department has reached out, and they require an understanding
of the last large transfer (if any) made by each user account.

You create a SQL derivation to help them out.
The `transfers` collection is keyed on the transfer `/id`,
so you'll need to re-key your derivation on the `/sender` account.
You also need to filter out transfers that aren't large enough.

Putting this all together:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="last-large-send.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/last-large-send.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="last-large-send-test.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/last-large-send-test.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

`derive: using: sqlite: {}` tells Flow that collection
`acmeBank/last-large-send` is derived using Flow's SQLite derivation connector.

This derivation has just one transform, sourcing from the `transfers` collection.
As its documents become available, they're evaluated by the SQL `lambda`
and its `SELECT` output is published to the derived collection.
Your SQL blocks access locations of source documents through [$parameter](#parameters) bindings.

The compliance department then materializes this collection to their preferred destination,
for an always up-to-date view indexed by each account.

### Finding New Account Pairs

:::note
This section introduces SQLite migrations and task tables.
:::

The fraud team needs your help: they have a new process they must run
the first time some sending account sends funds to a receiving account.
They would like to see only those transfers which reflect a new account pair of (sender, recipient).
To tackle this you need to know which account pairs have been seen before.

SQLite derivations run within the context of a persistent, managed SQLite database.
You can apply database [migrations](#migrations) that create whatever tables, triggers, or views you might need.
Then, the statements of your SQL lambda code can `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE`
from those tables, query from them, or any other operation supported by SQLite.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="first-send.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/first-send.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="first-send-test.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/first-send-test.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

This time, the derivation attempts to `INSERT` into the `seen_pairs` table,
and uses SQLite's [RETURNING](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_returning.html)
syntax to only publish documents for rows which were successfully inserted.

The `migrations` of your derivation can evolve over time, as can its `transforms`.
Any migrations appended to the list are automatically applied by Flow as-needed.

### Approving Transfers

:::note
This section expands usage of SQLite task tables and introduces a recursive data flow.
:::

Your users don't always check if they have sufficient funds before starting a transfer,
and account overdrafts are becoming common.
The product team has tapped you to fix this
by enriching each transfer with an **approve** or **deny** outcome
based on the account balance of the sender.

To do this, you first need to track the sender's current account balance.
Clearly an account balance is debited when it's used to sends funds.
It's also credited when it receives funds.

*But there's a catch*:
an account can only be credited for funds received from **approved** transfers!
This implies you need a collection of transfer outcomes
in order to derive your collection of transfer outcomes 🤯.

This is an example of a self-referential, recursive data-flow.
You may have used tools which require that data flow in a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
Flow does *not* require that your data flows are acyclic,
and it also supports a derivation that reads from itself,
which lets you tackle this task:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="outcomes.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/outcomes.flow.yaml title=outcomes.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="debitSender.sql" default>

```sql file=./bank/debitSender.sql title=debitSender.sql
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="outcomes-test.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/outcomes-test.flow.yaml title=outcomes-test.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>


### Grouped Windows of Transfers

:::note
This section introduces delayed reads, and applies them to implement a custom window policy.
:::

The fraud team is back, and now needs to know the _other_
transfers which an account has made in the last day.
They want you to enrich each transfer with the grouping of all
transfers initiated by that account in the prior 24 hours.

You may have encountered "windowing" in other tools for stream processing.
Some systems even require that you define a window policy in order to function.
Flow does not use windows, but sometimes you do want a time-bound grouping of recent events.

All collection documents contain a wall-clock timestamp of when they were published.
The transforms of a derivation will generally process source documents in ascending wall-time order.
You can augment this behavior by using a [read delay](#read-delay) to refine the relative order in which
source documents are read, which is useful for implementing arbitrary window policies:


<Tabs>
<TabItem value="grouped.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/grouped.flow.yaml title=grouped.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="enrichAndAddToWindow.sql" default>

```sql file=./bank/enrichAndAddToWindow.sql title=enrichAndAddToWindow.sql
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="grouped-test.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml file=./bank/grouped-test.flow.yaml title=grouped-test.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>


### Current Account Balances

:::note
This section introduces TypeScript derivations and reduction annotations.
:::

Your product team is back, and they want a database table
keyed by account that contains its up-to-date current balance.

As shown in the previous section, you could create
a task table which aggregates each account balance,
and then `SELECT` the current balance after every transfer.
For most use cases, this is a **great** place to start.
For interest and variety, you'll solve this problem using TypeScript.

TypeScript derivations require a `module` which you write.
You don't know how to write that module yet,
so first implement the derivation specification in `balances.flow.yaml`.
Next run the `flowctl generate` command, which generates two files:
* A module stub for you to fill out.
* A file of TypeScript interfaces which are used by your module.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="balances.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml title=balances.flow.yaml file=./bank/balances.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Module Stub" default>

```typescript title=balances.ts file=./bank/balances-stub.ts
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Interfaces" default>

```typescript file=./bank/flow_generated/typescript/acmeBank/balances.ts title=flow/acmeBank/balances.ts
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Next fill out the body of your TypeScript module and write a test:


<Tabs>
<TabItem value="balances.ts" default>

```typescript title=balances.ts file=./bank/balances.ts
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="balances-test.flow.yaml" default>

```yaml title=balances-test.flow.yaml file=./bank/balances-test.flow.yaml
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

One piece is still missing.
Your TypeScript module is publishing the **change** in account balance for each transfer.
That's not the same thing as the **current** balance for each account.

You can ask Flow to sum up the balance changes into a current account balance
through [reduction annotations](./schemas.md#reductions).
Here's the balances schema, with `reduce` annotations for summing the account balance:

```yaml title=balances.schema.yaml file=./bank/balances.schema.yaml
```

This section has more moving parts that the previous SQL-based examples.
You might be wondering, why bother? Fair question!
This is just an illustrative example, after all.

While they're more verbose, TypeScript derivations do have certain advantages:

* TypeScript derivations are strongly typed, and those checks often catch meaningful bugs and defects **before** they're deployed.
  Your derivation modules also play nicely with VSCode and other developer tooling.
* TypeScript derivations can use third-party libraries, as well as your native code compiled to WASM.
* TypeScript can be easier when working with nested or complex document structures.

Reduction annotations also have some benefits over task state (like SQLite tables):

* Task states are managed by Flow. If they grow to be large (say, you have a **lot** of accounts),
  then your task must be scaled and could require performance tuning.
  Reduction annotations, on the other hand, require *no* task-managed state and are extremely efficient.
* Certain aggregations, such as recursive merging of tree-like structures,
  are much simpler to express through reduction annotations vs implementing yourself.

[See "Where to Accumulate?" for more discussion](#where-to-accumulate).

## Connectors

As with captures and materializations,
Flow derivations are built around a plug-able [connectors](../#connectors) architecture.
Derivation connectors encapsulate the details of _how_ documents are transformed,
and integrate with Flow's runtime through a common protocol.

At present, Flow offers connectors for [SQLite](#sqlite) and [TypeScript](#typescript).


## SQLite

Flow's SQLite connector lets you write plain SQL which
is evaluated with each source collection document:

```yaml
derive:
  using:
    sqlite: {}
  transforms:
    - name: fromOrders
      source: acmeCo/orders
      lambda:
        SELECT $customer,
        DATE($timestamp) AS date,
        PRINTF('$%.2f', $item_price + $sales_tax) AS cost;
```

Given an input document:
```json
{
  "customer": "Wile E. Coyote",
  "timestamp": "2023-04-17T16:45:31Z",
  "item_price": 11.5,
  "sales_tax": 0.8
}
```

The derivation will produce an output document like:
```json
{
  "customer": "Wile E. Coyote",
  "date": "2023-04-17",
  "cost": "$12.30"
}
```

SQLite derivations run within the context of a persistent,
managed [SQLite database](https://sqlite.org/).
Most anything you can do within SQLite,
you can do within a SQLite derivation.

### SQL Lambdas

Lambdas are blocks of one or more SQL statements.
They can be defined inline within a Flow specification,
or they can be provided as a relative file reference to a file of SQL.

Your SQL lambda code can include any number of statements,
and your statements are evaluated in the context of your applied
database [migrations](#migrations).
Use regular `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` statements
in your SQL blocks to manipulate your tables as required.

Any rows which are returned by SQL statements,
such as `SELECT` and also variations like `INSERT ... RETURNING`,
are [mapped into documents](#document-mapping) that are published
into your derived collection.
Published documents must conform to your collection schema
or your derivation task will stop due to the schema violation.

:::tip
The SQLite connector wraps your lambdas in an enclosing transaction.
Do **not** include `BEGIN` or `COMMIT` statements in your lambdas.
You may use a [SAVEPOINT](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_savepoint.html) or `ROLLBACK TO`.
:::

### Document Mapping

In most cases, each named output column of your query becomes
a top-level property of its corresponding document.

When you directly select a `$parameter` its corresponding field name is used.
For example, a projection with field name `my-field` would be queried as
`SELECT $my_field;` and map into a document like `{"my-field":"value"}`.

A named column such as `SELECT $x * 100 AS foo;`,
maps to a property using the provided name: `{"foo": 200}`.

Your selected columns may included nested JSON documents,
such as `SELECT 'hello' AS greeting, JSON_ARRAY(1, 'two', 3) AS items;`.
The connector looks for SQLite TEXT values which can be parsed
into JSON arrays or objects and embeds them into the mapped document:
`{"greeting": "hello", "items": [1, "two", 3]}`.
If parsing fails, the raw string is used instead.

As a special case if your query selects a _single_ column
having a name that begins with `json` or `JSON`,
as is common when working with SQLite's [JSON functions](https://www.sqlite.org/json1.html),
then that column will become the output document.
For example `SELECT JSON_OBJECT('a', 1, 'b', JSON('true'));` maps into document `{"a": 1, "b": true}`.
This can be used to build documents with dynamic top-level properties.

### Parameters

Your SQL lambda will execute with every source document of the collection it transforms.
To access locations within the document, you utilize `$parameter` placeholders
in your SQL code, which bind to [projections](../#projections) of the source document.
You can use both your defined projections
as well as projections inferred statically from the collection schema.

You can access projected fields that are top-level
as well as those which are nested within a source document.
Consider the following schematized document:
```json
{"top-level": true, "object": {"foo": 42}, "arr": ["bar"]}
```

In your SQL code, you can use parameters like `$top_level`, `$object$foo`, or `$arr$0`.
If you're unsure of what parameter to use for a given field,
try typing something approximate and Flow will suggest the appropriate `$parameter`.

### Migrations

The SQLite connector offers a managed, persistent SQLite database
that can accommodate any number of tables, indices, views, triggers, and other schema,
as defined by your database migrations.
To add a migration, simply append it to the `migrations` array,
either as a block of inline SQL statements
or as a relative path to a file of SQL statements:

```yaml
derive:
  using:
    sqlite:
      migrations:
        - CREATE TABLE foo (thing INTEGER NOT NULL);
          CREATE INDEX idx_foo_thing foo (thing);
        - ../path/to/another/migration.sql
        - ALTER TABLE foo ADD COLUMN other_thing TEXT NOT NULL;
        - https://example.com/yet/another/migration.sql
```

:::caution
You cannot change an existing migration once it has been published.
Instead, add a new migration which applies your desired schema.
:::

Collectively, your migrations serve as the [internal state](#internal-state) of your derivation.
They don't directly cause any documents to be published into your derived collection,
but changes made to task tables in one SQL lambda execution are immediately visible to others.
Changes are also durable and transactional:
a Flow derivation transaction commits new documents to the derived collection
in lockstep with committing changes made to your task tables.

Flow is responsible for the persistence and replication of your SQLite database,
and the SQLite connector tracks and will apply your migrations as needed.

### Performance

Your observed performance will *of course* depend on the specifics of your use case,
including the size of your task states
and the complexity of your source documents and transformations.

Generally speaking, SQLite is very performant
and Flow's SQLite connector strives to drive it as efficiently as possible.
Real-world use cases are observed to process many **tens
of thousands** of documents per second on a single core.

Flow can also scale your task without downtime
by creating point-in-time clones of the database
that subdivide the overall workload and storage of the task.
Once created, these subdivisions process in parallel across
multiple physical machines to enhance performance.

## TypeScript

Flow's TypeScript derivation connector transforms your source documents
by executing methods of a TypeScript class which you implement.
TypeScript derivations are executed using [Deno](https://deno.land/)
and let you take advantage of the broad ecosystem of
available third-party JavaScript and TypeScript libraries,
as well as native code compiled to WASM.

TypeScript derivations are strongly typed:
Flow maps the JSON schemas of your source and output collections
into corresponding TypeScript types,
which are type-checked as you develop and test your derivation.
This helps catch a wide variety of potential bugs and avoid accidental violations of your collection data contracts.

### Modules

The bulk of a TypeScript derivation lives in its associated module,
which is a TypeScript source file that exports the class that implements your derivation.

Each derivation also has an accompanying, generated interfaces module.
Interface modules are managed by Flow: any changes you make will be ignored.
The `flowctl generate --source path/to/my/derivation.flow.yaml` CLI command
will generate interface modules under paths like
`flow_generated/typescript/acmeCo/my-derivation.ts`,
under the top-level directory under `--source` having a `flow.yaml` or `flow.json` file.

It will also generate a `deno.json` file in your top-level directory,
which is designed to work with developer tooling like
[VSCode's Deno extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=denoland.vscode-deno).

[See the Current Account Balances tutorial for a concrete example of modules](#current-account-balances).

### State

The abstract `IDerivation` class generated within the interfaces module
includes additional, experimental methods which can be used for
persisting and recovering internal state of the connector.

Consult the generated implementation and feel free to reach out to support
if you'd like more information on building stateful TypeScript derivations.

## Specification

A derivation is specified as a regular [collection](../#collections) with an additional `derive` stanza:

```yaml
collections:
  # The unique name of the derivation.
  acmeCo/my/derivation:
    schema: my-schema.yaml
    key: [/key]

    # Presence of a `derive` stanza makes this collection a derivation.
    # Type: object
    derive:

      # Provider of the derivation. One of `typescript` or `sqlite`.
      using:

        # Derivation is using SQLite.
        # Optional, type: object
        sqlite:

          # SQL migrations to apply as inline SQL or file references.
          # If a referenced file does not exist
          # a stub can be generated using `flowctl generate`.
          # Optional, type: array of strings
          migrations:
            - CREATE TABLE foobar (id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL);
            - ../path/to/other/migration.sql

        # Derivation is using TypeScript.
        # Optional, type: object
        typescript:

          # TypeScript module implementing this derivation,
          # as inline TypeScript or a relative file reference.
          # If a referenced file does not exist
          # a stub can be generated using `flowctl generate`.
          module: acmeModule.ts

      # An array of Transformations of the derivation.
      transform:

        # Unique name of the transformation, containing only Unicode
        # Letters, Numbers, `-`, or `_` (no spaces or other punctuation).
        - name: myTransformName

          # Source collection read by this transformation.
          # Required, type: object or string.
          source:
            # Name of the collection to be read.
            # Required.
            name: acmeCo/my/source/collection
            # Partition selector of the source collection.
            # Optional. Default is to read all partitions.
            partitions: {}

          # Lambda of this transform, with a meaning which depends
          # on the derivation connector:
          # * Lambdas of SQLite derivations are SQL blocks.
          # * TypeScript does not use `lambda`, as implementations
          #   are provided by the derivation's TypeScript module.
          # Lambdas can be either inline or a relative file reference.
          lambda: SELECT $foo, $bar;

          # Delay applied to sourced documents before being processed
          # by this transformation.
          # Default: No delay, pattern: ^\\d+(s|m|h)$
          readDelay: "48h"

          # Key by which source documents are shuffled to task shards.
          # Optional, type: object.
          # If not set, the source collection key is used.
          shuffle:
            # Composite key of JSON pointers which are extracted from
            # source documents.
            key: [/shuffle/key/one, /shuffle/key/two]

          # Priority applied to documents of this transformation
          # relative to other transformations of the derivation.
          # Default: 0, integer >= 0
          priority: 0

```

## Transformations

A transformation binds a [source](#sources) collection to a derivation,
causing its documents to be read and processed by the derivation connector.

Read source documents are first [shuffled](#shuffles) on a **shuffle key**
to co-locate the processing of documents that have equal shuffle keys.
The transformation then processes documents by invoking **lambdas**:
user-defined functions that accept documents as arguments,
return documents in response,
and potentially update internal task state.

A derivation may have many transformations,
and each transformation has a long-lived and stable name.
Each transformation independently reads documents from its
source collection and tracks its own read progress.
More than one transformation can read from the same source collection,
and transformations may also source from their own derivation,
enabling cyclic data-flows and graph algorithms.

Transformations may be added to or removed from a derivation at any time.
This makes it possible to, for example, add a new collection into an
existing multi-way join, or gracefully migrate to a new source
collection without incurring downtime.
However, renaming a running transformation is not possible.
If attempted, the old transformation is dropped and
a new transformation under the new name is created,
which begins reading its source collection all over again.

<Mermaid chart={`
	graph LR;
    d[Derivation];
    t[Transformation];
    s[Internal State];
    l[Lambda];
    c[Sourced Collection];
    o[Derived Collection];
    d-- has many -->t;
    d-- has one -->s;
    d-- has one -->o;
    c-- reads from -->t;
    t-- invokes -->l;
    l-- updates -->s;
    s-- queries -->l;
    l-- publishes to -->o;
`}/>

### Sources

The **source** of a transformation is a collection.
As documents are published into the source collection,
they are continuously read and processed by the transformation.

A [partition selector](./advanced/projections.md#partition-selectors) may be provided
to process only a subset of the source collection's logical partitions.
Selectors are efficient: only partitions that match the selector are read,
and Flow can cheaply skip over partitions that don't.

Derivations re-validate their source documents against
the source collection's schema as they are read.
This is because collection schemas may evolve over time,
and could have inadvertently become incompatible with
historical documents of the source collection.
Upon a schema error, the derivation will pause and
give you an opportunity to correct the problem.

### Shuffles

As each source document is read, it's shuffled — or equivalently, mapped —
on an extracted key.

If you're familiar with data shuffles in tools like MapReduce,
Apache Spark, or Flink, the concept is very similar.
Flow catalog tasks scale out into multiple shards,
each running in parallel on different physical machines,
where each shard processes a subset of source documents.

Shuffles let Flow identify the shard that should process a particular
source document, in order to co-locate that processing with other
documents it may need to know about.

For example, transforms of the
[Approving Transfers example](#approving-transfers)
shuffle on either `/sender` or `/recipient` in order to
process documents that debit or credit accounts on the specific shard
that is uniquely responsible for maintaining the balance of a given account.

<Mermaid chart={`
	graph LR;
    subgraph s1 [Source Partitions]
      p1>acmeBank\/transfers\/part-1];
      p2>acmeBank\/transfers\/part-2];
    end
    subgraph s2 [Derivation Task Shards]
      t1([derivation\/shard-1]);
      t2([derivation\/shard-2]);
    end
    p1-- sender: alice -->t1;
    p1-- recipient: bob -->t2;
    p2-- recipient: alice -->t1;
    p2-- sender: bob -->t2;
`}/>

If you don't provide a shuffle key,
Flow will shuffle on the source collection key,
which is typically what you want.

If a derivation has more than one transformation,
the shuffle keys of all transformations must align with one another
in terms of the extracted key types (string vs integer)
as well as the number of components in a composite key.

For example, one transformation couldn't shuffle transfers on `[/id]`
while another shuffles on `[/sender]`, because `sender` is a string and
`id` an integer.

Similarly mixing a shuffle of `[/sender]` alongside `[/sender, /recipient]`
is prohibited because the keys have different numbers of components.

:::info Beta
Eagle-eyed readers will notice that Flow supports extracted shuffle keys
but not *computed* shuffle keys.
Please reach out if computed shuffle keys are of interest to you!
We have most of an implementation we'd be happy to complete.
:::

### Lambdas

Lambdas are user-defined functions that are invoked by transformations.
They accept documents as arguments
and return transformed documents in response.
Lambdas can update internal task state,
publish documents into the derived collection,
or both.

Lambdas are "serverless": Flow manages the execution
and scaling of your transformation lambdas on your behalf.

### Processing order

Transformations may simultaneously read from many source collections,
or even read from the same source collection multiple times.

Roughly speaking, the derivation will globally process transformations and
their source documents in the time-based order in which the source documents
were originally written to their source collections.
This means that a derivation started a month ago
and a new copy of the derivation started today,
will process documents in the same order and arrive at the same result.
Derivations are **repeatable**.

More precisely, processing order is stable for each individual shuffle key,
though different shuffle keys may process in different orders if more than
one task shard is used.

Processing order can be attenuated through a [read delay](#read-delay)
or differentiated [read priority](#read-priority).

### Read delay

A transformation can define a read delay, which will hold back the processing
of its source documents until the time delay condition is met.
For example, a read delay of 15 minutes would mean that a source document
cannot be processed until it was published at least 15 minutes ago.
If the derivation is working through a historical backlog of source documents,
than a delayed transformation will respect its ordering delay relative
to the publishing times of other historical documents also being read.

Event-driven workflows are a great fit for reacting to events as they occur,
but aren’t terribly good at taking action when something _hasn’t_ happened:

> * A user adds a product to their cart, but then doesn’t complete a purchase.
> * A temperature sensor stops producing its expected, periodic measurements.

A common pattern for tackling these workflows in Flow is to
read a source collection without a delay and update an internal state.
Then, read a collection with a read delay
and determine whether the desired action has happened or not.
For example, source from a collection of sensor readings
and index the last timestamp of each sensor.
Then, source the same collection again with a read delay:
if the register timestamp isn't more recent
than the delayed source reading,
the sensor failed to produce a measurement.

Flow read delays are very efficient and scale better
than managing very large numbers of fine-grain timers.

[See Grouped Windows of Transfers for an example using a read delay](#grouped-windows-of-transfers)
[Learn more from the Citi Bike "idle bikes" example](https://github.com/estuary/flow/blob/master/examples/citi-bike/idle-bikes.flow.yaml)

### Read priority

Sometimes it's necessary for _all_ documents of a source collection
to be processed by a transformation before _any_ documents of some
other source collection are processed, regardless of their
relative publishing time.
For example, a collection may have corrections that should be
applied before the historical data of another collection
is re-processed.

Transformation priorities allow you to express the relative
processing priority of a derivation's various transformations.
When priorities are not equal, _all_ available source documents
of a higher-priority transformation
are processed before _any_ source documents
of a lower-priority transformation.

## Internal State

Derivation tasks often require an internal state,
perhaps to hold a partial aggregation or join.
Transformation lambdas query and update that state
as they process source documents.

For SQLite derivations,
the entire SQLite database is the internal state of the task.
TypeScript derivations can use in-memory states with a
recovery and checkpoint mechanism.
Estuary intends to offer an additional mechanisms for
automatic internal state snapshot and recovery in the future.

The exact nature of internal task states vary,
but under the hood they're backed by a replicated
embedded RocksDB instance which is co-located
with the task shard execution contexts that Flow manages.
As contexts are assigned and re-assigned,
their state databases travel with them.

If a task shard needs to be scaled out,
Flow is able to perform an [online split](../advanced/shards/#shard-splits),
which cheaply clones its state database into two new databases
 — and paired shards — which are re-assigned to other machines.

## Where to accumulate?

Derivation collection schemas may have
[reduction](schemas.md#reductions) annotations,
and lambdas can be combined with reductions in interesting ways.
You may be familiar with `map` and `reduce` functions
built into languages like
[Python](https://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/map_filter.html),
[JavaScript](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/javascript-map-reduce-and-filter-explained-with-examples/),
and many others
or have used tools like MapReduce or Spark.
In functional terms, lambdas you write within Flow are "mappers,"
and reductions are always done
by the Flow runtime using your schema annotations.

This means that, when you implement a derivation,
you get to choose where **accumulation** will happen:

 1. Your lambdas can update and query aggregates stored in [internal task state](#internal-state).
    [Approving Transfers](#approving-transfers) is an example that maintains account balances in a SQLite table.
 2. Or, your lambdas can compute *changes* of an aggregate, which are then reduced by Flow using reduction annotations.
    [Current Account Balances](#current-account-balances) is an example that combines a lambda with a reduce annotation.

These two approaches can produce equivalent results,
but they do so in very different ways.

### Accumulate in Internal Task State

You can accumulate using the internal state of your derivation:
say, by using creating and using an internal table within your SQLite derivation.
You then write lambdas which update that state,
or query it to publish derived documents.

For example, consider a collection that’s summing a value:

| Time | State | Lambdas                             | Derived Document |
| ---- | ----- | ----------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| T0   | **0** | update(2 + 1 + 2), publish(5)       | **5**            |
| T1   | **5** | update(-2 + 1), publish(4)          | **4**            |
| T2   | **4** | update(3 + -2 + 1), publish(6)      | **6**            |
| T3   | **6** | update()                            |                  |

Using a derivation's internal state is a great solution if you expect to
materialize the derived collection into a non-transactional store.
That's because its documents are complete statements of the current answer,
and can be correctly applied to systems that support only at-least-once semantics.

They’re also well-suited for materializations into endpoints that aren't stateful,
such as Pub/Sub systems or Webhooks.


### Accumulate in a Database

To accumulate in your materialization endpoint, such as a database,
you define a derivation with a reducible schema
and implement lambdas which publish the _changes_ to a current answer.
The Flow runtime then uses your reduction annotations
to combine the documents published into your derived collection.

Later, when the collection is materialized, your reduction annotations
are applied again to reduce each collection document into a final,
fully-reduced value for each collection key
that's kept up to date in the materialized table.

A key insight is that the database is
the _only_ stateful system in this scenario.
The derivation itself is stateless, with lambdas that are pure functions,
which is typically extremely performant.

Returning to our summing example:

| Time | DB    | Lambdas           | Derived Document |
| ---- | ----- | ----------------- | ---------------- |
| T0   | **0** | publish(2, 1, 2)  | **5**            |
| T1   | **5** | publish(-2, 1)    | **-1**           |
| T2   | **4** | publish(3, -2, 1) | **2**            |
| T3   | **6** | publish()         |                  |

This works especially well when materializing into a transactional database.
Flow couples its processing transactions with corresponding database transactions,
ensuring end-to-end “exactly once” semantics.

When materializing into a non-transactional store,
Flow is only able to provide weaker “at least once” semantics;
it’s possible that a document may be combined into a database value more than once.
Whether that’s a concern depends a bit on the task at hand.
Some reductions like `merge` can be applied repeatedly without changing the result,
while in other use cases approximations are acceptable.
For the summing example above,
"at-least-once" semantics could give an incorrect result.

[Learn more in the derivation pattern examples of Flow's repository](
  https://github.com/estuary/flow/tree/master/examples/derive-patterns
)